This is a great lesson which no university
taught me no book taught me but that one
person that institution taught me such a
bigger lesson so I thought of sharing
with you how to manage Success most
importantly the failure i had to repeated a
number of times I don't mind repeating
that one incident that incident for me
is a university education
I'm not ready anywhere i have a so far i
have gone around the orbit 71 times around
the Sun i have not gone through any
education such a beautiful education i
got in seven 1979 1980 . i thought of
sharing with you on this occasion it is
like this 1979 august 17th  we were
ready for launch of the satellite launch
vehicle with 44 subsystem and thousands
of thousands of the components it was
built in Vikram Sarabhai Space Center and
at that time professor Satish dhawan was the Chairman
space Commission and
is also Space Center and he gave me the
task 1973 to build a satellite launch
vehicle to put a satellite in the orbit
1973 he gave me this task in 79 we
were ready thousands of engineers ten
thousands of workers and staff they all
work together then we moved that satellite that
satellite launch vehicle from vikram
Sarabhai Space Center to the now
Satish dhawan Space Center at sriharikota
those so the launch vehicle was
was in the launchpad and that  days 17th August 1979 and I am
the mission director project director
and you're all the control center and
computer takes over at t-minus eight minutes
computer take over it was very difficult
for me as a mission director to check
hundreds of parameters so it has to be
checked computer we handover the whole
launch of the Rocket system system to the
computer so when t-minus eight minutes came
i handed over to the computer for the
launch on 17
august seven 1979 and thousands of
people are waiting for the launch
mission centers and they're working
throughout the country and some down
train stations exactly at T-minus eight
minutes computer tookover and then at
t-minus four minutes computer put a
hault it says don't launch so we're
all because at that time the whole
rocket system alive and everybody is a
closed system propallent system electronic
system all around ready to launch
computer says don't launch at t-minus
four minutes that immediately a computer
printout comes out there is some problem
in the second stage control system there
is a leakage so you don't launch behind me there
are number of experts six -seven experts my
experts ten years twenty years  experienced people
i talk to them and they are there
computers to find out what happened and
they tell me within a within a minute
they say there's a problem in the second
state control system and we cannot
launch computer says but we believe as experts
that the ignitor  that is
oxidizer sufficiently more there even
though there is a leakage in system you can
launch they asked me to launch that is i
can say the computer shut off the
computer I can manually launch the
rocket system
I took that i discussed with my experts I
believed in them i agree with them and
responsible for it
I immediately put the rocket in the
manual mode so rocket took off hundred
seconds beautiful launch and the rocket
first stage did it's job its a
four stage rocket system then the
second stage took off with in a minute
within a second it recorded to spin that
means which we study is control rocket
system by guidance system but it was
going to spin I knew I lost the rocket
system within few seconds instead of
putting the satellite into orbit the
whole system went to Bayofbengal so it was
a failure and then how do you handle a
failure is very important for the
entrepreneurs life is not so simple is a
we have to handle the failures with stout
heart my chairman with that is that
professor Satish dhawan
exactly 6 :30 i was very tired of
continuously working he come to my room
you join me for a press conference on
that day press call in the morning there is a
press conference hundreds of  Press
reporters media people have assembled
just Professor Satish Dhawan told
me I am going to handle the press
conference
you're going to come with me he took
me there was a press the national press
international press they asked lot of questions how can he put 20 cores in
Bayofbengal one guy asked and like
that so many serious questions after
all people will ask us questions people's money
so like that number of questions were
there and professor Satish Dhawan said yes it's a
failure first time we launched we have
gained a lot of system and definitely we
will succeed i will give all the support ,
technologies and give the whole supposed
to my scientist i will be will succeed
in a year's time he said friends did you
observe what happened there
I am the mission director i am the
project director I have failed the mission
with me 5,000 people worked but chairman
Indian space research organisation he
take the responsibility the failure he
completely switched my  failure to his
failure
this is the leadership quality
ex-exactly after one year that is eighteenth
july 1980 we go to the launch pad  and
countdown starts t-minus eight minutes
i handover to the computer computer checks
out first stage you need it for it initiates the  rocket system first stage gives
the required velocity second stage gives
the required velocity third state gives
the required velocity and four stage
required the escape velocity for
to put the satellite in the orbit, i am
seeing  in front of me what is
performance taking place i took the
micros with the mic announce all the
station here is your mission director
the satellite is into orbit and we
congratulate you I told them no that's
not the important that's one of the
important things happen but after 30
minutes Satish dhawan called me
go to the press conference you conduct the press
conference he said can you see the
significance failure he took it and success  he gave me to my team just a
great lesson is a great lesson
yeah
this is a great lesson which no
university taught me
no book taught me but that one person
that institution that taught me such a